All right, so we have an exercise,
a list reordering exercise.
We have a drag and drop widget,
speaking of dragging.
So I can reorder these little items, But
how the heck am I gonna
use a keyboard to do that?
[LAUGH] That's what we're gonna do,
we're gonna make it work with the keyboard
and the screen reader better.
So it's so fun to drag these,
like very satisfying.
[LAUGH] Pretty easy to do these days.
So as before, we have an example
here in our exercise page and
we have a StackBlitz version.
Pick your poison here.
>> What do I need to look for
on A11Y on mobile?
There's no mouse, there's no keyboard,
so how important is A11Y on mobile?
>> It is important.
So people use third-party like Bluetooth,
keyboards.
That is definitely a thing.
And especially if you don't have
the dexterity to touch the screen,
I mean, for some people, their phone
is mounted on their wheelchair,
like they physically can't touch it.
So think about that use case.
You can navigate using
Bluetooth keyboards.
So it is pretty important.
But there's some kinda
mobile best practices,
like making your touch targets bigger so
that you can reach them with your fingers.
And that's part of WCAG.
So yeah, I think a lot of
those basics do apply, and
that's why WCAG applies to native mobile.
So in the Slides, there is
an article in here from DQ on what
WCAG 2.2 means for
native mobile accessibility.
So if you wanna learn more about what
you're on the hook to do, check that out.
List reordering.
And this is one that I've had to
work on a similar pattern, and so
we're actually going to do a little
bit of work with MVDA as well.
Hopefully we can actually see
this one not work this time.
So we'll do this incrementally.
So I'm gonna hop over to VS Code.
I am going to open up our,
this is our ReorderableList
component in React.
So it has a ReorderableList,
and then within that,
there is a ReorderableListItem
component that is repeated for
each one of those dynamic items.
So this has the mouse dragging, it does
not have anything for the keyboard yet.
So if we scroll down to
our kind of output here,
we've got a div with
an unordered list in it.
Just special,
it doesn't have anything unique about it.
And then this ReorderableListItem
is creating LI elements,
and it's passing a bunch of props.
That's about it.
There's no hooks on here for
keyboard users.
An LI is not reachable, it's not operable.
Sure, I could drag it with the mouse,
I could drag all day, but
I'm never gonna be able to
use a keyboard with it.
It has some CSS.
Like the little icon that
you see in the drop zone,
that's all done with CSS,
which is really fun.
Like the sort button, that's a little
SVG background image, just so
that you know that's where some of
this functionality is coming from..
And we already have the styles in here for
the fixed version of it.
But let's go in here and
make some changes.
I also included already the React ARIA
live announcer component.
So let's see how far we get.
[LAUGH] We might just need to look at
the finished version to get that far for
time purposes.
But we can announce these changes,
xo that when you move the list,
we can actually send custom
announcements to say,
we've reordered item 1,
it's now in position 2.
So you can have awareness of, whoa,
I'm moving this with the keyboard.
And I'm gonna move it and
I know where it moved to.
And actually,
the component that I originally worked on,
that this was inspired by,
was a whiskey shelf.
It was a site, drink distiller.
You could buy whiskey online,
it was amazing.
And you had your top shelf of
all your favorite whiskeys and
you could reorder them.
So that was the real feature
that I was like, wait a minute,
we need to make this [LAUGH] accessible.
And you could order whiskey with
voiceover, it was pretty awesome.
So for this, I'm just gonna look
ahead at what I wrote on here.
I'm on the wrong exercise.
Go reordering.
Okay, so let's start with,
we need something to focus on.
So within our list items,
let's go to reference the display.
So we have this little icon here, but it's
just a background image on the list item.
So why don't we make that into a button?
And because I know that this
is gonna be troubling, but
it's gonna be hard to make this work
in NVDA for that same browse mode,
focus mode thing we learned about earlier.
I'm gonna put the dragging,
editing behind in edit mode so
that we actually go Enter to edit.
And I think that's pretty common
in a lot of user interfaces,
is you hit Edit, it allows you to drag.
I know from experience, it will be easier
to make it accessible if you do that,
cuz you can potentially use
application mode safely.
We'll see if we need it.
So let's go put that button in here.
So within the list item,
I'm gonna put a button.
I'm actually gonna put
the name text outside of it,
so it's just the icon in the button.
So on this button element,
we are going to add an aria-label,
cuz it is an icon button.
I'm gonna say, in a template literal, I'll
say Reorder, and I'm gonna put the name.
So I'm,
Grabbing the name dynamically as we're
iterating through these list of items, so
I can say Reorder $ from position.
And what index was it?
And I'm gonna reorder from
position $.
So I think index is 0 based.
And I'm just making it into
a more user-friendly string so
that it's starting from position 0.
It's just like, that's too geeky for
the general public.
So I added 1, but
that's where we're starting.
We've got, let's see, what else?
I'm gonna say onKeyDown,
add a KeyDown here, and say handleKeyDown.
onKeyUp, And I'll say (event).
And this callback function, I'm passing
things through as a prop from the parent.
And that's just so that I could have
this be its own chunk of code, but
then the parent's gonna
direct what it's doing.
So I'll call a callback
function up on the parent, and
I'll pass in the event object and
what index was the element, what was this?
One more thing, I'm gonna add a ref to
this, and just that was using forward ref.
That was a way to have the parent
know about these elements, but
they're dynamically created, so
I use the React forward ref API to pass
that through to a child element,
could be pretty helpful.
Just to make sure I got it all,
I'm also gonna add a className.
So className outputs as class
in the rendered output.
If you work with React,
you probably know that.
But okay, so we've got this part.
There are no, wait,
we have a handleKeyDown.
We needed to find that cuz
we have it referenced here.
So I'm gonna say const handleKeyDown.
I'm gonna pass the event object.
And I'll say if (event.code===),
you could do event.key or
event.code I'll say arrowUp cuz I'm going
up or down to get through this list.
Or if event.code is ArrowDown,
I am going to keep the browser
window from scrolling.
That's what this code is doing.
So without it,
it was gonna move the list, but
it's also gonna scroll the page cuz that's
what the ArrowUp, ArrowDown buttons do.
So sometimes you have to write an extra
handler just to prevent that, cuz
you're in the right space to do that, and
it's only under these certain conditions.
So I think to speed this along,
let's actually go and
look at the full version.
So we have our ReorderableListItem.
This is what we just typed.
Let's go look at the rest of the list.
So the edit mode,
I think we had the isReordering already.
That's what the drag and
drop was using to determine whether it
needed that drop zone and all that stuff.
I added another state variable so that
the edit mode button that we're gonna add,
it has its own state that
it's flipping on and off.
So this toggle edit mode, set is editing,
that'll flip that React state variable.
And we are gonna do the bonus round of
announcing this in a screen reader.
So I have an announce function here that
calls the React ARIA live announcer.
And live regions are a way to
pipe messages to a screen reader.
I love this React ARIA 1,
because it will just handle
injecting the live region for you.
You don't even have to do anything.
You just call this function,
it will pipe those messages for you.
There are two levels.
There's assertive and polite.
We'll do assertive to
interrupt any other messages.
Are you gonna say something?
>> No, I wasn't aware and
that's a good way of putting it.
It's cool.
>> Yeah, they called it rude at one point.
It's kind of funny cuz it
really does interrupt.
Sometimes that's what you need.
Okay, so we've got our dragging,
that's all the same,
all of our dragging in here on drop.
Here's our item callback function for
the arrow key handling.
So we've got our event.key,
could be event.code, either one.
We're iterating through the items.
Which one are we on?
Where am I in the list?
So if I delete one,
what should come before it?
So this is the logic to do that.
And of course, there's more than one way
to do it, but that's how I wrote it.
So then if the arrow key is
going the other direction,
I guess that was ArrowDown, ArrowUp looks
at, where are we in the list of items?
Are we at the end?
Are we in the middle.
Do I need to loop around
again in the beginning,
depending on where I am
in the list of the array?
So it'll go and create a new section and
move us to the right place, setItems.
So it basically reorders the array and
then replaces that as
the state of the list.
That's how the drag and drop works, too.
But we can do that, and that's why I
love React, it will just re-render.
I didn't have to go on a pen nodes and
do all of the vanilla JavaScript stuff
that is how this works under the hood.
I love React for accessibility stuff
because I can just re-render something
at the right time and then use state and
ARIA attributes and things.
So you just change the state on and
off and it's amazing.
Super modern tools for accessibility.
So here's where we're announcing
also when these announce.
So this item moved from position 0 or
position 1 to position 2 or position 3.
So let's look at the markup.
We've got this edit mode, this button.
You haven't actually seen it yet,
but now we're gonna add a button.
And when it's in edit mode,
it'll say Edit gear list.
When it is editing,
it'll say Exit edit mode.
So it changes the label text or the button
text, depending on what mode you're in.
We can also use the state variables to
change the way the list looks slightly.
You could make it look like it's editing,
or you could change button, icons.
We are using the role of application here,
so we'll fire this up in NVDA and
compare the two.
But that's about it for this list.
So let's go do that.
Let's try out this reordering
exercise over on Windows, so
we can see what the effects are,
especially of the application mode.
But yeah, let's look at this.
>> Ctrl+R.
>> So I'm gonna refresh this.
>> Loading page.
List reordering.
Accessible you is.
/completed-components.
>> Accessible you is.
>> /exercise-4-reordering/.
>> [LAUGH] Okay, so
we have this dragable version.
>> List reordering exercise.
>> I mean,
we're not gonna do anything with that.
So for this version-
>> Edit gear list.
>> We can go into this edit mode.
>> [SOUND] Edit gear list button.
>> Do you hear the little boop,
that noise?
So, yeah, it's changing modes there, so.
>> Stopped editing.
>> Edit mode activated.
So that's that.
>> React ARIA live announcer, we can
announce a message of when we go in and
out of a mode.
So that's kind of nice.
I didn't have to put that on the button
and hope that it would announce somehow.
I could actually programmatically say,
hey, announce this for me.
So then I can go into the list.
>> Sortable list, reorder paddle
boards from position 1 button.
>> So that's sortable list.
I think that's an ARIA role description.
If I recall,
that's how that's made possible.
But from here, I'm gonna hit the up and
down arrow keys.
>> Paddle boards move to position 2.
Reorder paddle boards
from position 2 button.
>> So sometimes, it's a bit verbose,
I can't exactly control what it says.
So it's announcing the thing that I
told it to, the announcement, and
it's saying what's on the button.
Cuz I actually moved, the focus is moving,
so you reorder it, and
then you tell the focus where to go.
Cuz otherwise, it's like, where was it?
It was in the previous position before, so
I have to move focus on to
the button in the new position.
>> Paddle boards move to position 3.
Reorder paddle boards
from position 3 button.
>> And so without that application mode-
>> Paddle boards move to position 2.
It won't move them cuz
we'll be in the wrong mode.
And so that's what that does.
And so in this edit mode,
we can be, just like the slideshow,
a bit more prescriptive
about how that works.
And when you have the insert
key on your keyboard,
you can get in and
out of the mode manually.
And users, I think, if I were doing that
myself, I would definitely be, you listen
for those sounds and know what mode you're
in, you get used to that after a while.
But if I hit Escape,
I haven't wired that up.
So to get out of this mode right now,
I have to go back to the button and
toggle it.
But that's how I'm allowing this drag and
drop.
So I made a pretty big ugly
button that says Edit gear list.
I think what I see more often on
actual user interfaces is it will be
a little edit button icon.
I feel like I had to edit something
recently that used that pattern.
And so now if you see these
little edit modes to reorder and
things, now you know why.
It can be very useful.
Cuz otherwise I think what happens is
you try to do the drag and drop and
make the reordering work, you're real
tempted to add application mode to get
it to work seamlessly like that.
Cuz I didn't have to do any key commands,
I could hit the up arrow keys, and
it just worked.
But that's because it
has application mode.
So it's passing that arrow key event
directly through the browser instead of
trying to navigate through the page
content and document mode or browse mode.
So that's our reordering list example.
And you are free to take pieces of that,
go look, how was that done again?
And use that,
cuz those techniques might come up when
you're working on super
interactive widgets.
These are some patterns that I haven't
seen out in the wild quite as much,
like the regular tabs and menus.
There's plenty of examples
of those out there in
ARIA Authoring Practices Guide and
various component libraries.
Reordering, not so much, at least
with perfectly working drag and drop.
Sometimes you get one or the other.
It'll work with mouse dragging,
but not with the keyboard, or
maybe it'll work except in NVDA.
That's always the thing that
you have to check, is NVDA.
I've gotten tripped up by that many times.
And JAWS, they work the same.
>> Any questions?
>> You show the code where
the switch between modes is?
>> Yes, yes, thank you for asking.
So one last look at this.
This is on the overall list, the parent.
And actually, VS Code's kind of nice,
it'll show you what
function you're in up here.
So where we are creating a wrapper
element around these items,
that's where the edit mode
is changing the role.
So this is kind of an exception
to the changing a role.
And actually, I'm probably breaking
one of the ARIA rules here.
So that maybe is a way we could
improve this, is to have,
potentially, I could move some of
this logic up a level to a div or
something, because the list,
it has its own role to begin with.
So it's possible.
Maybe this should be a role of list
when it's not a role of application,
or I should put this on a parent
element that isn't already a list.
So in the world of continuously improving,
I'm always open to
improvements like that myself.
So maybe that's something
I could improve here.
But that is a use of ARIA
role description here.
The sortable list, I think that's fine.
It's just what role do we have here?
I think role list might be
better than role group.
But then again, test it.
Don't take my word for it.
Go test things.
We wanna follow those rules, we also
need to test stuff to see what works.